The following is a conversation with Richard Wolff
one of the top Marxist Economist and philosophers in the world.
This is a heavy Topic in general and for me personally given my family history in the Soviet Union in Russia and in Ukraine.
Today the words Marxism socialism and communism are used to attack and to divide much more than to understand and to learn.
This podcast I seek the ladder.
I believe we need to study the ideas of Karl Marx as well as their various implementations throughout the 20th and the 21st centuries.
And in general we need to both Steel Man and to consider seriously the ideas we demonize.
And to challenge the ideas with dogmatically except this true even when doing so is unpleasant and at times dangerous.
And now a quick few second mention of each sponsor check them out in the description is the best way to support this podcast.
We got skiff for email indeed for hiring.
On it for supplements blankets for nonfiction and linode for cloud computing Choose Wisely my friends.
And now on to the full ad reads as always no ads in the middle I tried to make this interesting but if you skip them please still check out our sponsors I enjoy their stuff maybe you will too.
This show is brought to you by skiff.
A private end to end encrypted email they also do collaboration all that kinds of stuff but the emphasis is on the end-to-end encryption actually the emphasis on doing the end in encryption correctly.
And creating a user interface that's fun and easy to use and intuitive it's not a giant mess I mean they do masterfully.
Obviously to manage your email
it should be easy clear sort of compelling enjoyable experience as much as email can be so sort of effective at productivity when you're writing one it's clear.
Important things that's private and 10 secure not big Tech not skip themselves not anyone has access to this email but you skipped gives you.
10 gigabytes of free storage and you can use the mobile and desktop apps from any device sign up at skiff.com Flex.
It shows brought to you by indeed hiring website I've used them as part of many hiring efforts I've done for the team's of lead in the past they have tools like.
Indeed instant match giving you quality candidates with resumes that indeed fit your job description immediately it's really important to use the right tool for the job.
The people that you spend many many many of your hours and life with and not only do you spend hours with them you spend.
The hours doing really difficult stuff so at its best you get a chance to form bonds I would even say friendship.
I think this life is short some of the most Pleasant experiences I've had in the people have known had is overcoming challenges at work,
right now you get 75 bucks sponsor job created to upgrade your job post and you can get up to 500 bucks
extra in sponsored job credits Within These virtual interviews at indeed.com / Lex offers good for limited time terms and conditions apply.
This episode is brought to you by on it a nutrition supplement and fitness company and make Alpha Brain which is a nootropic
that helps the poor memory mental health and focus I don't use it everyday use it as a boost on occasion when I have an especially difficult deep work session when I know it's going to be two three four hours of deep thinking.
And especially if there's going to be frustrating dead ends you know I get excited about an idea
I start thinking through it I start to get your design and then you realize not at doesn't work for this reason for that reason for this reason and so on and then you have to stay in that failure hold.
And make sure mentally that you're correct in your valuation backtrack and see can we sneak around the reason that's doesn't work so that that can be really exhausting type of thinking
for that sometimes I will take an Alpha Brain to be a super rocket launcher boost
for the mind you can get up to 10% off Alpha Brain at Lex Friedman.com on it.
The show is also brought to you by Blink assist link is takes the key ideas from thousands of nonfiction books and condenses them down into just 15 minutes that you can read or listen to
I can recommend a bunch of books from there some of the biggest best non-fiction books ever
or on their sapiens meditations by Marcus Aurelius beginning of infinity by David Dutch and the list goes on and on and on.
I use it for three things one I use it to pick the books I'm going to read that I haven't read yet
to I use it to summarize books I just don't think I'll have time to ever get to but they're part of our public discourse so it's important to get at least a bit of a sense of what's going on and finally the books have already read.
To review those books because the insights the quick insights and blankets are better than anything I've ever seen anywhere you can get a free 7-Day trial and 25% off a blink as premium membership at blink is.com Lex.
This episode is also brought to you by linode.
It just brings a smile to my face it's a Linux virtual machines it's an awesome computer infrastructure that lets you develop deploy and scale
whatever applications you build faster and easier this is both for small personal projects and huge systems
lower cost and AWS but more importantly to me is the Simplicity quality of the customer service with real humans 24/7 365,
there's a bunch of competitors that can list all of which I've considered all the which I've used in the past linode is the best it's the sexiest
it's the most reliable it delivers on what a computer infrastructure should deliver on easy-to-use easy to monitor
reliable scalable all that kinda stuff and like I said great customer service
if it runs on Linux and runs on linode that's their model is a good model visit linda.com Lex and click on the create free Account button to get started with 100 bucks in free,
credit.
This is the Luxe Friedman podcast to support it please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends here's Richard Wolff.
Music.
Let's start with the basic question but maybe not so basic after all what is Marxism what are the defining characteristics of Marxism as an economic and political Theory and ideology.
Well the simplest way to begin a definition would be to say it's the tradition that takes its
founding inspiration from The Works of Karl Marx but because
these ideas that he put forward spread as fast as they did and as globally as they did,
literally it's 140 years since Marks died.
And in that time his ideas have become major types of thinking in every country on the
Earth if you know much about the great ideas of human history that's an extraordinary spread in an extraordinarily short period of historical time
and what that has meant that speed of spread and that Geographic diversity
is that the marxian ideas interacted with very different cultural histories religious histories
and economic conditions.
So the end result was that the ideas were interpreted differently in different places at different times and therefore Marxism as a kind of first flush definition is the
totality of all of these very different ways of coming to terms with it for the,
roughly 40 50 years Marxism was a tradition of thinking critically about capitalism
Marx himself that's all he really did he never wrote a book about communism in ever wrote a book really about socialism either his comments were occasional fragmentary dispersed
what he was really interested in was a critical analysis of capitalism.
And that's what Marxism was more or less in its first 40 or 50 years the only.
Qualification of what I just said was something that happened in Paris for a few weeks in 1871 there was a collapse of the French.
Consequent upon losing a war to bismarck's Germany and in the result was something called the Paris commune the working class of Paris rose up
basically took over the function of running
the Parisian economy and the Parisian society and Marxist people people influenced by marks were very active in that Community the leadership of the Communist and Marx wasn't that far away he was in London.
These things were happening in Paris you know that's an easy transport even then and for a short time.
Very short
Marxism had a different.
Quality in addition to being a critique of capitalism it became a theory of how to organize Society differently.
Before that had only been implicit now it became explicit what is the leadership of the Paris commune going to do
and why and in what order in other words governing organizing a society.
But since it only lasted a few weeks the French army regrouped and under the leadership of people were very opposed to Mark's they March back in the Paris took over killed a large number of the.
Of the communards as they were called and deported them to islands in the Pacific that the were part of the French Empire at the time.
The really big change happens in Russia in 1917 that now you have.
A group of marxist sledding Trotsky all the rest who.
Or in this bizarre position to seize a.
Once again a warlike in France this organizes the.
Throws the government into a very bad reputation because it is the government that losers World War One
has to withdraw as you know brest-litovsk in all of that and the government collapses and the army revolts.
And in that situation a very small political party.
Russian Social Democratic Workers Party splits under the pressures of all of this.
Into the Bolshevik and menshevik.
Divisions Lenin Trotsky and the others are in the Bolshevik Division and to make a long story short he's in Exile his position Lenin's position
makes him gets him deported because he says Russian workers should not be.
Killing German Workers are be this is a war of capitalist who are dividing the world up into colonies and Russian working people have no.
Should not kill and should not die for such a thing as you can expect.
They arrest him and they throw him out interestingly in the United States the the comparable leader at that time of the Socialist Party here.
As you know there was no Communist party at this point that comes later the head of the Socialist Party is very important American figure named Eugene Victor Debs
makes exactly the same argument to the Americans should not fight in the war he's in the past has nothing to do with Lana I don't even know if they,
no of each other but he does it on his own he gets arrested and put in jail here in the United States,
by the way runs for president from jail and does very well.
Really very well remarkable and he's the inspiration for Bernie Sanders if you you see the link although he had much more,
courage politically than Bernie has that's the internet I'd love to return to that link maybe later yes history Rhymes yes the complicated story anyway with the importance in terms of Marxism is that now
this seizure of power.
By a group of marxists that is a group of people inspired by marks developing what you might call a Russian even though they were differences among the Russians too but
a Russian interpretation this now has to be transformed from a critique of capitalism
into a plan at least what are you going to do in the Soviet Union and a lot of this was then trial
never marks never laid any of this out
probably wouldn't have been all that relevant if he had because it was 50 years earlier in another country Etc so what
begins to happen and you can see how this happens and more later in China and Cuba and Vietnam and Korea and so on is that you have kind of a bifurcation.
Much of Marxism remains chiefly the critique of capitalism but another part of it becomes.
A set and they differ from one to the other a set of Notions.
Of what an alternative post-capitalist Society or to look like how it ought to work and there's lots of disagreement about it lots of confusion and I would say that,
that's still where it is that you have a tradition now that has these two major Wings critique of capitalism,
notion of the alternative and then a variety of each of those and that would be the framework in which I would answer that's what Marxism is about
it's basic idea if you had to have one is that Human Society.
I can do better than capitalism and it ought to try and then we can start to talk about.
What we mean by capitalism fine so we'll look at the critique of capitalism on one side but maybe stepping back what do you think marks would say if you just looked at the
different implementations of the ideas of Marxism throughout the 20th century were his ideas that were implicit were made explicit.
Would would he shake his head would he enjoy some of the parts of the implementations like what how do you think he would analyze it
well he had a great sense of humor I don't know if you had a chance to take a look at his writing but
he had an extraordinary sense of humors are my guess is he would deploy his humor and answering this question too he would say some of them are inspiring some of his interpretations of his work and he's very pleased with those.
Others are horrifying and he wishes somehow he could erase the connection between those things and the lineage they claim from him which he would.
There's a German word I don't know if he's lying if you speak the other languages know there's a wonderful German word called Fete Sita
and it's stronger than the word refuse it's if if you want to refuse something but with real strong emphasis has shifted the how is a German way of saying I know whatever you to do that.
And he would talk and you know in philosophical terms because remember he was a student of philosophy he wrote his doctoral thesis on Ancient Greek philosophy and all the rest.
He would wax philosophical and say you know that the idea is you put out or a little bit like having a child.
You have a lot of influence but the child is his own or her own person and will find his or her own way and these ideas once they're out there.
Go their own way and as you said there's a particular way that this idea spread the speed at which it spread throughout the world made it even less able to be sort of stabilized right
and connected back to the origins of where the idea came from the only people who ever really tried that.
With the Russians After the Revolution because they occupy the position for a while not very long
but they occupy the position for a while in which
he was exalted right there have been all these people criticizing capitalism for a long time even the Marxist ever since mid century and these were the first guys,
who pulled it off.
They made it and so that there was a kind of presumption around the world their interpretation must be kind of the right one because look they did it and so for a while they could
enunciate their interpretation and it came to be widely grasped as something which by the way gets called in the literature
official Marxism the very idea that you would put that adjectives in front of Marxism or Soviet Marxism or Russian my there were these words that were the adjective was meant to somehow say
kind of this is the Canon we've been depart from it but this is the cannon before the Russian Revolution there was no such thing and.
By the 1960s it was already displayed it was gone but for a short time 30 40 years.
It was a kind of and the irony is particularly here in the United States.
Where the taboo against Marxism kicks in right after World War 2 is so total in this country that.
I for example through most of my adult life have had to spend a ridiculous amount of my time
simply explaining to American audiences that the Marxism they take as canonical
is that old Soviet Marxism which wasn't the cannon before 1917 and hasn't been since at least the 1960s
but they don't know it's not that they're stupid and it's not that they're ignorant it's that,
will need Millions maybe about any it's not a mental problem it's the taboo shut it down and so all of the reopening
that in a way re captures what went before and develops it in New Direction they just don't know
but nevertheless it's a serious attempt at making the implicit ideas explicit the the Russians the Soviets at the beginning of the 20th century
made a serious attempt at saying okay beyond the critique of capitalism how do we actually build a system like this and so in that sense.
Not at a high level but at a detailed level it's interesting to look at those particular
schools may be right because for example let me just take your point one step further you really cannot understand the Cuban Revolution the Chinese Revolution Vietnamese and the others because each of them
is a kind of response let's call it.
To the way the Soviets did it are you going to do it that way well yes and no is the answer this we will do that way but that were not going to do and the differences are huge
but you could find a thread I can do that for you if you want in which all of them are in a way reacting.
The Originals yes
very much so like maybe most of rock music is reacting to The Beatles and the stones there's something like that oh can you speak to the unique elements of the various schools of that Soviet Marxism so we got leninism,
trotskyism stalinism maybe even let's expand out to maoism so maybe I could speak to sort of leninism.
And please tell me if I'm saying dumb things there's a I think for Lennon there was an idea that there could be a small.
So the Vanguard party like a small controlling entity that's like wise and is able to do the central planning decisions then for.
Stalinism when interesting so Stalin's implementation of all of this one interesting characteristic is to move away from the international aspect.
Of the ideal Marxism to.
Make it all about Nation nationalism the strength of nation and then Somalia ism is.
It's different in that it's focused on agriculture and Rural and then trotskyism I don't know.
Except that it's anti Stalin I mean I don't even know if there's unique sort of philosophical almost there anyway can you maybe from those or something else speak to different unique elements that are interesting to think about,
about implementation of Marxism in the real world probably the best way to get in the into this.
Is to describe something that happened in Marxism that then shapes the answer to your question.
In the early days of Marx's writings.
And you know he his life spans the 19th centuries born in 1818 dies in 1883 so literally he lives the 19th century and.
You might mean to make things simple you might look at the first half of the first two-thirds of his life as overwhelmingly.
Gathering Together.
The precursors to his own work marks was unusually scholarly in the sense that partly because he didn't work a regular job and partly because he was
an exile in London most of his adult life he worked in the library I mean he had a lot of time he got subsidized a little bit by angles whose family were manufacturers.
And you might say the first half to two-thirds of his life are about.
The critique of capitalism and that was what.
In a broad sense the audience for his work Western Europe more or less was interested in that's what they wanted.
And he gave that to them he wasn't the only one but he was very very effective at it by the last third of his life.
He and the other.
Producers of a anti-capitalist movement people like the chartists in England that's a whole nother movement.
The anarchists of various kinds like prudent in France or kropotkin or bakunin and Russia and so on.
You put all these together and there was a shift in what the audience
let's call it a mixture of.
Militant Working Class People on the one hand and critical or radical inteligencia on the other they now wanted a different question they were persuaded by the analysis they were agreeable that capitalism
was a phase they would like to do better than.
And the question became how do we do this not anymore should we why should we could we maybe fix capital is no they had gotten to the point the system has to be fundamentally changed,
but they got,
they didn't go yet where you might imagine they didn't go insane but what will that new system looks like they didn't go that way what they did was ask the question how.
Could we get Beyond capitalism it seems so powerful it seems to have captured people's minds people's daily lives and so on and the.
Focus of the conversation became this was already by the last third of the 19th century the question of the agency to mechanism whereby we would get Beyond and again make a long story short.
The conversation focused on seizing the government.
She before that it wasn't that the government was not a major interest if you read Marx's Capital the great work of his maturity three volumes
there's almost nothing in the in the state he mentions it Polly he's interested in the details of how capitalism works
Factory by factory store by store author what's the structure the government secondary for him but there's also humans within that capitalist system of there's the working class right it's about that's what I did ruggle
that's what he's interested in each in the world think of it almost mechanically like the workplace in the workplace there some people who do this and other people who do that and they accept this division of authority and they
fish division what's going on here particularly because he believed that the core economic.
Objective of capitalism was to maximize something called profit which his analysis located right there in the.
Workings of the Enterprise and not in the government was not that the key factor here and he was looking at ideas of value yes how much is the.
How much value does the labor of the individual,
workers provide in that means how do we reward the workers in an ethical way so those are the questions of what would we get here okay but the government
is real and part of that picture okay so it's very significant that towards the end of the 19th century Marxist still alive on this begins but it's it really gets going after he dies
is this debate among marxists about the role of the state.
They all agreed nearly all of them agree that you have to get the say the the working class has to get the state because they see the state as the.
Ultimate guarantor of
when things get really out of hand the capitalist calls the police or he calls the army or both of them and so the government is in a sense this key Institution
captured in marches Lang Marxist Language by the bourgeoisie by the by the other side the capitalists.
And yet vulnerable because of suffrage if suffrage is universal or nearly so if everybody gets a vote which in a way capitalism brings to bear
part of its rejection of feudalism in the French American Revolution is to create a place where
elected represented so that the government being subject to suffrage creates the notion aha.
Here's how we're going to we have to seize the state.
And then that gets agreed upon but there's a big split as to how to do it one side says.
You go with the election you you mobilize the voter that gets to be called reform ISM within Marxism and the other side
is Revolution don't do that this system if I may quote burning again is rigged you can't get there they've long ago learned how to manipulate parliament's.
They by the politicians and all that and therefore Revolution is going to be the way to do it Revolution.
Gets a very big boost because the Russians they did it that way they didn't do I mean they fought in the Duma in the in the parliament but they didn't and that this focus on the state,
I would argue.
Goes Way Beyond what The Debaters at the time and if you're interested in the great names there was a great theorist of the.
The role of the state in a reformist strategy to get power in Germany named Edward Bernstein,
very important his opponents in Germany.
Were Karl kautsky and Rosa Luxemburg the two other huge figures in Marxism at the time and they wrote the articles that everybody reads but it was a much broader debate by the way that debate still goes on.
Reform as a revolution.
And in terms of not all that different I mean it's adjusted to history but in terms of different can you comment on where you.
Lean in terms of the mechanism of progress Reformation verses and rather show you the historical shirt.
Over and over and over again in most cases the reformists have always won.
Because Revolution is frightening is scary is dangerous.
And so most of the time when you get to the point where it's even a relevant discussion not a abstract thing for conferences but a real strategic issue the reformists have one I mean and.
I'll give you an example from the United States in the Great Depression of the 1930s you had an extraordinary shift to the left in the United States the greatest shift to the left in the country's history before or since,
nothing like it suddenly you created a vast left-wing composed of the labor movement.
Which,
when crazy in the 19th are we we organize more people into unions in the 1930 then at any time before or any time since it is the explosion and at the same time the explosion of
two socialist parties and the Communist party that became very powerful and they all work together creating
very powerful leftist president in this country they debated in a strategically real way reform or revolution
the reformers were the Union people by and large and the the Communists were the revolutionaries by and large because they were affiliated with the
the Communist International with Russia and all of that and in between you might say that the two socialist parties one that was trotskyist and inspiration and the other one
more moderate Western European kind of socialism and they had this intense debate
and the ended up the reformist won that debate there was no revolution in the 1930s here but there was.
A reform that achieved unspeakably great successes which is why it was as strong and remains as strong as it does because it achieved.
In a few years in the 1930s started around 1930 23 Social Security in this country we had never had that before that's the same one we have now unemployment insurance never existed before.
You have till today minimum wage for the first time still have that today and a federal program of employment that I hired 15 million people
these were unspeakable gifts if you like to the working class that the 30s and the 40s 30s very much in the 40s anymore but in the 30s and here's the best part.
It was paid for by taxes on corporations and the rich,
so when people today say where you can tags are going the joke is I have to teach American history to Americans,
because it has been erased from Consciousness will return to that but first let's take a stroll back to the beginning of the 20th century with the Russians with the Russians so.
Their interpretation goes like this.
Everybody was right the state is crucial we were right we were the revolutionaries we seized the state here in Russia.
Now we have the state and socialism is when the working class.
Captures this state either by three former Revolution and then uses its power over the state to make the transition from capitalism to the better thing we're going toward.
Elegant make a long story short in the interest of time what happens which is not unusual in human history is that the means.
Becomes the end in other words Lennon whose Crystal Clear before he don't live very long he dies it,
23 so he's only in power from 17 state of 22 but that time he has his brain trouble and that's 1923 by the way not at age 23 yeah so for listening and 1923 yeah he's only there for 45 years
he's very clear even says I've done work on that published so I am and all this stuff,
he says in a famous speech Let's Not fool ourselves we have captured the state.
But we don't have socialism we have to create that we have to move towards that.
With Stalin you know Lenin dies and there's a fight between Stalin and Trotsky Trotsky loses the fight he's exiled it goes to Mexico Stalin is now alone in power and does all the things
he's famous or inFAMOUS for and by the end of the 20s Stalin makes.
A decision I mean not in a thought that he makes it alone but things have evolved in Russia so that they do the following they declare that they are,
socialism in other words socialism becomes
when you capture the state not when the state capture has enabled you to do XYZ other things no no the state itself once you have it
is socialism so when a socialist captures the state that's socialism exactly and hit eight that's exactly right.
And that feel like there's definitionally confusing well it shouldn't be because I give you an example yeah if you go to many parts of the United States today.
And you ask people what socialism they'll tell you they look you right in the face and they'll say the post office.
You know when I first heard this as healing the air you know what the post office it took me a while to understand the post office
Amtrak the Tennessee River all the examples in the United States where the government runs something this is,
socialism.
See capitalism is if the government doesn't run it if a private individual who's not a government official runs it well then it's capitalism if the government takes it.
Then it's socialist so what is wrong with that
reasoning so the idea I think there's nothing wrong with it's a way of looking at the world it's just got nothing to do with marks but there's marks there's Marxism let's try to pull this apart so what role.
The central planning have in Marxism so Marxism is concerned with this class struggle.
With respecting the working class right.
What is the connection between that struggle and Central planning that is often Central planning is often associated with Marxism
fright so centralized power
doing Russia did that allocation so that's a that's that has to do with a very specific set of implementations initiated by the Soviet Union has nothing to do with marks how else can you do I don't think you can find
yes anywhere in Marx's writings
anything about Central planning or any other kind of planning again fundamentally then marks Marxist work it has to do with.
Factories Woodworkers with with the bourgeoisie with
and the the exploitation of the working classes I but you still have to take that leap what is beyond capitalism right so maybe we should
Turn To That explicit yes on that okay
yes what okay we've ready look historically at several attempts to go beyond capitalism how else can we go beyond capitalism let me push a little further they didn't succeed
it might judgement as a Marxist and I'm now going to tell you why they didn't succeed because they didn't.
Understand as well as they could have or should have what Marx is was trying to do.
I think I would have been like them if I had lived at their time under their circles this is not a critique of them but it's a different way of understanding what's going on all right so.
Give you an example most of my adult life I have taught marxian economics.
I'm a professor of Economics I've been at all my life I'm a graduate of American universities.
As it happens I'm a graduate of what in this country passes for its best universities.
Let's talk another conversation you and I can have so I went to Harvard and then I went to Stanford and I finished a Yale I'm like a poster boy for Elite Education.
They tried very hard by the way I had I spent 10 years of my life in the ivy league 20 semesters one after the other no break.
In those twenty semesters 19 of them never mentioned a word about Marx's.
That is no critique of capitalism was offered to me ever with one except one professor
in Stanford in the one semester I studied with him he gave me plenty to read but nobody else so that's really interesting you've mentioned that in the past and that's very true which makes you a very interesting figure.
To hold your ground intellectually through this idea space we're just people.
Don't really even talk about it perhaps we can discuss historically why that is but nevertheless that's the case so.
Moxie in economics did Karl Marx come up in conversation as a kind of dismissive,
the best example yeah he came up only as an object of dismissal for giving example the major textbook and economics that I was taught with and that pig was for many years the canonical book isn't quite anymore.
Was a book authored by a professor of Economics at MIT named Paul Samuelson and people kind of you know a whole generation or two
what drained on his textbook if you open the cover of its textbook he has a tree.
And you know and the tree is Adam Smith and David Ricardo at the root and then the different branches of he's trying to give you an idea as a student of how the thing.
And it's a tree and everybody on it is the Bourgeois and then this is one little Branch goes off like this and so starts heading back down
that's Karl Marx in other words he had to have it Complete because he's not a complete Faker but beyond that no there was no nothing in the book gives you.
Two paragraphs of an approach.
But that's Cold War I mean that's really that's really neither here to that that's the craziness yeah that's the Cold War in this country my professors were afraid of anyway let me get to the.
To the core of it when I think it will help Marx was interested in the relationship of people
in the process of production that he's interested in the factory the officers store what goes on and by that he means what are the relationships among the people that come together in a workplace.
And.
What he analyzes is that there is something going on there that has not been adequately understood.
And that has not been adequately addressed as an object needing transformation
what does he mean the answer is exploitation which he defines mathematically in the following way.
Whenever in a society any society you organized.
People suck adults not to children not to sicken but you know healthy adults
in the following way.
A big block of them a clear majority.
Work that is they use their brains and their muscles to transform nature a tree into a chair a sheep into a wool sweater whatever.
In every human Community marks argues there are the people who do that work but they always produce.
More chairs more sweaters more hamburgers than they themselves consume.
Whatever their standard of living doesn't have to be low to be medium can be hard but they always produce more than they themselves.
That more by The Wager marks when he writes this uses the German word Mayor mhr which is the English equivalent of more it's the more that more got badly translated into the word
Surplus shouldn't it in,
but it was by the way by German and English people doing the translations what's the difference between more and surplus is there a nuanced
yeah because Surplus has a notion of its discretionary it's sort of extra he's not taking a not making a judgment that it's a simple math equation yes very simple one - together
yes
x minus X is X is the total output Y is the consumption by the producer therefore x minus y equals s the Surplus exactly.
Now Marx argues.
The quit the minute you understand this you will ask the following question who gets the Surplus.
Who gets this extra stuff that is made but not consumed by those who made it and Marx's answer is.
Therein lies one of the great Shapers of any society how is that organized for example who gets it
what are they asked if anything to do with it in real exchange forgetting you what's their social role for example here we go now if you get this and you get the core of it anyway
and I don't charge much,
the workers themselves will get less than lawyers that that's right the workers themselves could get it yes that's the closest marks comes to a definition of communism,
communism would would be if the workers who produce the Surplus together
decide what to do with it so this has to do not just with who gets it but more importantly who gets to decide who gets it.
Who gets it and who gets to decide what to do with it.
Because you can't decide it if you don't have disposition over it so the the lot this the logic of the word sequence it's produced.
It's box uses the word appropriated in other words whose property who gets to decide if you like what happens
all the property ever meant is who gets to desire and whose excluded that's a clean definition of communism for right that's the by the way it's not just clean the only one
so what's can we just Linger on the definition of exploitation yes contacts easy
becomes very easy to exploitation exists if and when the Surplus that's produced is taken and distributed by people
other than those who produced it slaves produces Surplus which the master gets
surfs producer Surplus which the Lord gets employees produce a surplus
which the employer gets it's very simple,
these are exploited t''v class structures because one class produces a surplus appropriated.
Distributed,
by another group of people who not the ones who produced it which creates hostility and midi Envy anger resentment and all of the problems you can lump under the heading
class struggle I use a metaphor simple metaphorical story you have two children let's assume
and you take them to Central Park a few blocks from here it's a nice day and the children are playing and incomes one of those men with a ice cream truck comes by ding a ling a ling a ling your children's either ice cream daddy get me an ice cream
so you walk over you take some money and you get two ice cream cones and you give them to one of the children.
The other one begins to scream and yell and how.
Obviously what's the issue and you realize you've just made a terrible mistake so you order.
The one you gave the two ice cream cones to give one of those to your sister or your brother or whatever it is.
And that that's how you solve the problem until a psychologist comes along and says you know you didn't fix it by what you just did.
You should never have done that in the first place.
My response so you understand all of the efforts to deal with inequality in economic political cultural these are all.
Giving the ice cream cone back to the kid you should you should never do this in the first place a reallocation of resources creates bitterness and heartless
look at our weave this country is tearing itself apart now in a way that I had never seen in my life and I've lived here all my life and I've worked here all my life.
It's tearing itself apart and it's tearing itself apart basically over the read division the redistribution of wealth having so badly distributed in the fur but that's all in marks.
And notice as I explained to you what is going on in this tension-filled production seen in the officer Factory the store.
I don't have to say a word about the government not interested in the government the government's really have a very secondary matter to this core question and here comes the big.
If you make a revolution and all you do is remove the private exploiter.
And substitute a government official without changing the relationship you know,
you can call yourself a Marxist all day long but you're not getting the point of the Marxism the point was not who the exploiter is but the exploitation
per se you got to change the organization of the workplace so there isn't a group that makes all the decisions and gets the Surplus very visibly another one that produces it if you do that you will destroy
the whole project you will
not only will you not achieve what you set out to get but you'll so misunderstand it that you the Germans again have a phrase is gay chief
it goes crooked it doesn't go right the project gets off the rails because it can't
it can understand either what its objective should have been and therefore it doesn't understand how and why it's missing,
it's subjective it just knows that this is not what it had hoped for when there's a lot of has any questions here so one is.
To what degree that is human nature to what degree.
This communism a lack of exploitation of the working class naturally emerge if you leave two people together
in a room and come back a year later if you leave five people together in a room if you leave a hundred people and 1,000 people it seems that humans form hierarchies,
naturally,
so the the clever the charismatic the sexy the the muscular the powerful what however you define that starts.
Start you know becoming a leader and start to do maybe exploitation in a non negative sense a more generic sense starts to become an employer
not in the capitalist has but just as a human here you go do this and in exchange I will give you this just becomes the leadership role right so the question is
yes okay it would be nice the idea sort of Communism would be nice too,
it's nice and still in the weary but it doesn't work in practice because of human nature because of human nature that's thank you so what what can we say about leveraging human nature to achieve some of these ends.
There's so many ways of responding in no particular order here are some of them
the history of the human race.
As best I can tell is a history in which a succession of,
social forms forms of society arise
and as they do they.
Rule out some kinds of human behavior on the grounds that they are socially disruptive and unacceptable.
The argument isn't really then.
Is there a need or an instinct is there some human nature that makes people want to do this well whatever that is this has to be repressed or else we don't have a society
and Freud helps us to understand that that repression is going on all the time and it has consequences it's not a finished project you repress it
it's gone it doesn't work like that so for example.
When you get a bunch of people together at some point they may develop animosities towards one another that lead them to want the other person or persons to disappear to be dead to be gone.
But we don't permit you to do that we just don't
every economic system that has ever existed.
Has included people who defend it.
On the grounds that it is the only system consistent with human nature and that every effort to go beyond it has to fail because it contradicts Human Nature,
I can show you English documents of every tribal Society I've ever studied every anthropological
community that has ever been studied slavery wherever it's existed I can show you how endless documents in which the Defenders of those systems not all of them of course but many Defenders used that
argument to naturalize a system is a way to hold on to it to prevent it from going to to counter the argument
that every system is born every system evolves and then every system dies and therefore capitalism since it was born
since it's been developing we all know what the next stage of capitalism is working in fur.
The burden is on the people who think it isn't gonna guess it doesn't mean they're wrong but what you're saying is if you look at history.
You're deeply suspicious of the argument this is going against human nature because we keep using that for basically everything including toxic relationship toxic systems absolutely destructive systems that said.
Well let me just ask a million different questions so so one what about the the argument that sort of the employer,
the capitalist takes on risk.
So the yeah versus the employee who just they're doing the labor the the capitalist is actually putting up a lot of risk
what's are they not in sort of aggregating this organization and taking this giant effort hiring a lot of people aren't they taking on risk that this is going to be a giant failure,
first of all there's risk.
Almost in everything you undertake any project that begins now and ends in the future had takes a risk that between now and that future something's going to happen that makes it not work out,
I mean I got into a cab.
Before I came here today in order to do this with you I took a risk I could the cab could have been an accident and lightning could have hit us a bear could have eaten my left foot who the hell knows shouldn't I reward you for the risk you took,
hold it a second results do this step by step so everybody's taking a risk I always found it wonderful you talk about risk and that you imagine it's only some of us
who take a risk let's go with the worker in live with the capitalist that worker.
He moved his family from Michigan to Pennsylvania to take that job.
He had he made a decision to have children,
they are teenagers they're now in school at a time when their friendships are crucial to their development you can yank them out of the school because his job is gone he took an enormous risk.
To do that job everyday.
To forestall all the other things he could have done he was taking a risk that this job would be here tomorrow,
next month next year he bought a house which Americans only do with mortgages which means he's now stuck he has to make a monthly payment if you make a mistake.
You capitalist he's the one who's going to your a capital you got a lot of money otherwise you wouldn't be in that position.
You got you've got a cushion he doesn't.
If you investigate you'll see that in every business I've ever been I've been involved in a lot of them so you think is possible to actually measure risk or is your best argument is there's risk involved in
in a lot of both the working class and the bourgeoisie the capitalist that's right and it's very good worker the worker would never come and say.
Because she's been taught right I want this payment a wage.
For the work I do and I want this page this payment for the risk I take,
well there's some level of communication like that to you you have acknowledgement of dangerous jobs but that's probably built into the salary all those kinds of things you understood but you're not incorporating you don't real full spectrum of risk language you don't believe that.
This country is now being literally transformed From Below by an army of workers who work at Amazon fast food joints you know what their complaint is it's killing us.
We get paid shit.
And it's killing us there is no relationship except in the minds of the Defenders of capitalism between the ugliness that difficulty the danger of labor on the one hand and the wage
let me give you just a couple of examples please this is my this my job it's my life what I do all right the median income.
Of a child care worker in the United States right now as we speak is $11.22 an hour median so 50% May class 50% make more,
the median income for car park attendant.
Is several dollars per hour higher than that what does the car park attendant do he stares at your car.
For many hours to make sure that nobody comes and grabs it maybe he Parks it and moves it around to get it in and out
by any measure that I know of that makes any rational sense being in charge of,
of toddlers to 34 year-olds who are at the key moment of mental formation the first five years to do to give that a lower salary than you give the guy who watches your car
come on I know how to explain it.
Gender explained all kinds of issues at the car park people are males and the day the childcare people are females and that
I didn't our culture is a very big marker of what but the one who said only the economics professor.
Nobody else says this stuff because in economic I don't know if you were familiar with our profession but we have something which we call marginal product this is a this is a fantasy.
I was a mathematician before I became an economist I loved mathematics I specialized in mathematics so I know mathematics pretty well.
What economists do is silly is childish but they think it's mathematics or a fifth kid it is but.
Think for a minute what it means to suggest that you can identify the marginal product.
Of a factor of production like a worker in the textbook when it's taught I've taught this stuff I hold my nose but I teach it then I explain to students what I just taught you is
horse shit but I first I teach it what is the marginal product if I might be useful it's an ocean is.
If you take away one worker right now from the pile what will be the diminution.
Over the output that's the marginal product of that worker measured by the amount of the output that diminishes.
Output of the raw product
of the product usually in real terms of physical not the value you could do a value but it's really more the physical your if I mean I there is a transformation thing well I'd love to talk to you about about value is so interesting yeah what is value be glad to talk to you about value and price and all of that
but I just want to get to it.
Hagel who is Marx's teacher has a famous line you can't step in this in the same river twice and the argument is you and the river have changed,
between the first and the second time so it's a different you and it's a different you can choose not to pay attention to that just you can't claim you're not doing that you can't claim that you can actually do that because you can.
There is no way
to do that so the the meaning that you can't just remove a worker and have a clean mathematical calculation of the effect that it has on the outputs one because too many other things are going on too many things are changing and you cannot assume.
Much as you want to that the outcome.
On the output side is uniquely determined by the change you made on the input side
can't do that even in the even in the average it's not going to work out
you can take a look at mathematics is full of abstractions you can abstract you can say as as we do an economic Catalyst paribus you know everything else held constant.
But you have to know what you just did you held everything cuz you know why you do that
because you can't do that in the real world that's not possible you better account for that otherwise you're mistaking the abstraction from the messy reality you abstracted from to get the,
as a quick tangent if we somehow went through a thought experiment or an actual experiment of removing every single economists from the world will be better off or worse off much better off okay economics if and I'm one
you know I'm talking about myself see economics going to ship ship all the economies to Mars and still don't see how it works off but the serious part of this is that economics.
You know it's really about capitalism economics as a discipline is born with cap and there was no such thing when I teach I teach courses at the University for example call history of economic thought.
All right and I begin the students with Aristotle and Plato.
And I say you know they talked about really interesting things but he never called it economic there was no it meant it made no sense to People Too abstract,
economics broadly defy it made no sense that's a creation much much later that's capitalism that did that created the feel of so when I give them Plato and Aristotle I have to give them particular passages.
By the way football.
Because your audience will like it Plato and Aristotle talked about markets because they lived at a time in ancient Greece when Market relations were beginning to intrude upon these
societies
so they were both interested in this phenomenon that we're not just producing goods and then Distributing among us we're doing it in a quid pro quo you know I'll give you three oranges you give me two shirts a market exchange
and both Aristotle and Plato hated markets denounced them and for the same reason.
They destroy social cohesion they destroy Community they make some people rich and other people poor and they set us against each other and is terrible and that here's what they agreed on that here's what they disagreed on one of them
I said okay that can be no markets that was Plato Aristotle comes back and says no no no too late for that,
the disruption caused it in society by getting rid of this institution that has crawled in amongst us would be too devastating so we can't do that
but what we can do is control it,
regulated get from the market what it does reasonably well and prevent it from doing the destructive things it does so badly
so the the fundamentally the destructive thing of a market is that the engine of capitalism and so it creates exploitation of the worker it facility I wouldn't concede that's to facilitate facilitates it and it is an institution
that Plato and Aristotle feel
is a terrible danger to community is there which by the way is a way of thinking about it that exists right now all over the world,
look the medieval Catholic church had a Doctrine the prohibition of usury.
You know it and this was that God said if there's a person who needs to borrow from you then that's a person in need.
And the good Christian thing to do is to help him.
To demand an interest payment rather than to help your fellow man is.
God hates you for that that's a sin Jesus is crying all the way to wherever it is he goes but would Jesus be crying,
when you try to scale that system so that has to do with the intimate human interaction the idea of markets as you're able.
To create a system that involves thousands millions of humans and there'd be some level of safe.
Self-regulating fairness.
There might be but it's hard to imagine that charging interest would be the way to do that wonder what so I guess opposed you suppose you were interested in having.
Suppose you took us your problem we have a set of funds that can be loaned out.
People don't want to consume it they ready to lend it okay.
To whom should they lend it what we could say in our society we're going to run this the way professors
institutions like MIT work this they write up a project they send the project into some government office.
Where it is looked at against other projects and this office in the government decides what kind of fund this one,
and that one because they're more not needed in our society we are in Greater need of solving this problem
then that problem and so we're going to lend money to people working on this problem more readily or more money than we lend over here because we're going to.
But instead what we do is who can pay the highest interest rate.
Whoa what what what do you do it why what ethics would justify you do it it's like a market in general something is in shortage or markets are about how to handle shortage that's one basic way to understand it.
And so if the demand is greater than the supply which is all the word shortage.
Means has no other meaning if the demand is greater than the supply okay now you got a problem you can't satisfy all the demand errs.
Because you don't have enough Supply you have a shortage okay now how are you going to do it in a market you will allow people who have a lot of money to bid up the price of whatever is short.
That solves your problem because as the price goes up.
The poor people can of they drop out they can't buy the thing at the end exalted price so you've got a way of Distributing the shortage it goes to the people with the most money.
At this point most human beings confronted with this explanation of a market.
Would turn against it because it contradicts their Christian judaic Islamic all of them.
What's what you know what that means it means that a rich person can get the scarce milk and give it to their cat.
While the poor foot person has no milk for their five children there it is you want to Market why do the fundamental thing that seems unfair there's the resulting inequality now or death.
Or death well that's the ultimate inequality yes it is what about.
We're going to jump around from the philosophical from the economics to the sort of debate type of thing what about sort of the lifting ties raise all boats meaning.
If we look at the 20th century right.
A lot of people maybe you disagree with this but they attribute a lot of the Innovation and the average Improvement in the quality of life
to capitalism to inventions and Innovation to engineering.
And science developments that resulted from competition and all those kinds of forces so not looking at the individual unfairness of exploitation as its.
Specifically defined but just observing historically looking at 20th Century we came up with a lot of cool stuff that seemed to have made life easier and better on average.
What do you say that I have several responses to that but I do disagree pretty far fundamentally
with what's going on there but let me give you the argument so you that you can hear them and then you can evaluate them as can anybody who's listening or watching
Marx was a student of Hegel and one of hegel's central arguments was that everything that exists exists quote in the contradiction in simple English.
There's a good and bad side if you like to everything
and you won't understand it unless you accept that proposition and start looking for the good things that are the other side of the bad ones and the bad things that are the other side of the good ones Etc
so the dialectic yes exactly and marks very attentive to that.
Explicitly agrees with this on many occasions and applies it of course to the central object of his research,
capitalism so this is not a simple minded fellow who's telling you all the bad things about capitalism
as if there were nothing that this system achieved or accomplished and one of the things he celebrates a lot is.
The technological dynamism of the system which marks takes to be
profound because you know he lived at the time when major breakthroughs in textile technology and Mining in chemistry and so on were achieved
but as to the notion that that capitalism is therefore responsible for the Improvement in
in the quality or the standard of living of the mass of people marks time comes back and says oh wait a minute here
number one capitalism as a system.
Has been mostly represented by capitalists which makes a certain sense.
And those capitalists with very few exceptions some but very few have fought against every effort to improve the lives of the mass of people.
The goal of a capitalist is to minimize labor costs,
what that means is replace a worker with a machine move the production from expensive u.s. to cheap China
bring in Desperate immigrants from other parts of the world because they will work for less money than the folks that you have here at home every measure to help the standard of living of American workers had to be fought for for
decades over the opposition of capitalists from the beginning.
To right now the reason we have a minimum wage which was passed 19 middle of the 1930s when it was proposed it was blocked by capitalists they got together they don't and today.
Just a factoid for you.
The last time the minimum wage was raised in United States federal minimum wage was in 2009 when it was set at the lofty some of $7.25 an hour.
Which you cannot live on
over the last 12 years or so whatever it is now 11 12 13 years since then.
We have had an increase in the price level in this country every year and in the last year eight and a half percent.
During that time that the prices went up the minimum wage was never raised.
What this is a time of stock market boom of growing inequality this is a sister you know.
The nerve of the defender of capitalists who wants now to get credit for the Improvement in the standard of life of the workers that was fought by every generation.
You know what takes your breath away and it's an argument whoa but I take my hat off if I had one.
Because that is one of the only ways to justify this system.
Long ago let me get it the heart of it long ago capitalism could have.
Overcome hunger could have overcome disease could have be Way Beyond what we have now.
But it didn't and that's the worst moral condemnation imagine how do you justify.
That one you could you didn't look I let me get at it another way because just me may I interest you anyway.
The issue is not that capitalism isn't technologically Dynamic it is and along the way it has developed things that have helped people's lives get better no.
But the notion that the mass enjoyment of a rising standard of living is somehow built into capitalism is factually nuts and.
Is such an outrageous and I can give you a because you do math you'll understand it think of it this way.
Imagine a production process in which you have.
A hundred dollars that the capitalist has to lay out for tools equipment and raw materials and a hundred dollars that he has to lay out for workers hire the workers and he puts them all together and he has an output.
And let's say the output is 100 units of something one of the prizes and that's his Revenue
and when he when he.
Takes his product and sells it and gets the revenue let's say the revenue is it doesn't really matter it's 120
for lack of a better word any take 220 sorry and he takes 100 of it and replaces the tools equipment and raw materials he used up.
Another 100 to hire the workers for the next shift and the other 20 is his prophet and he puts that aside now Along Comes A technological breakthrough.
A machine a new machine and the new machine is so effective.
You can get the same out the same number of units of output with half the workers so you don't need to spend a hundred on workers you only need to spend 50.
You can do it with half the workers and so the capitalist goes to the workers by the way this happens every day and he says to half of them you're fired.
Don't come back Monday morning I don't need you it's nothing personal it's just I got a machine
why does he do that because of the 50 he now no longer has to spend on labor because don't need half of them he keeps
everything else is the same the machine everything else is does it just to make the math easy so he he keeps as his own profit the 50 that before he paid for those workers.
Because when he sells it for 220 that 50 don't have to give to the next job we could get in the machine
so that's what he does.
The technology leads he's happy he's become more profitable he's got an extra 50 which is why buys the machine.
The workers are screwed half of them just lost their job have to go home to their husband and wife
tell them I don't have a job anymore I didn't do anything wrong but the guy was nice enough to say he was not the wrong with me but he doesn't need them so I'm completely screwed here I don't know what I'm going to do about the decks we have the house on mortgage my children's education or whatever else is got going for himself right now
now the point there was of course an alternative path.
The alternative path would have been to keep all the workers pay them exactly the same that you did before for half a day's work.
He would have got the same output same Revenue same profit as before.
But the gain of the technology would have been a half a day of Freedom every day of the lives of these workers the majority of workers would have been really helped.
By this technology.
But instead they were screwed so that one guy the employer could make a big bundle of more money you want to support a system like this well I'm still go back to Hegel yes the good and the bad yes.
So you just listed the bad and you also first listed the good to technological innovation of this kind of system the question is the alternative.
Whatever as we try to sneak up to ideas of what the alternative might look like right what are the good and the bad of the alternative so you just kind of as a
opposite the contract by contrast showed that while a nice alternative is you work less
get paid the same you have more Leisure Time right opportunity to to pursue other.
Interests other interest the creative interest family right,
flourish as a human being basically strengthen and embolden the basic Humanity that's under all of us yes but then what cost does that have.
On the,
the deadline fueled competition fueled machine of technological innovation that is the positive side of capitalism slows it down
it slows it down and the question is which is more important for the flourishing of humanity I love agree with that.
And I love there to be a democratic mechanism so let's let's discuss it
let's debate it and then let's ah decide what mixture cuz it's not either or the mapping problem I gave you is either or we could mix it you could have
a third less of a working day instead of a half less and then the other part would be extra profit for our employer Etc today so let's have a democratic discussion of what is the mix between the positive and
we have no such thing all of this is decided by one side in this debate which not only.
We know what they do they always choose the one that maximizes their profit because that's what they were told to do in business school where I've taught,
so we not only is it an undemocratic decision but it's lopsided to boot so we don't have the opportunity,
but I would love for us to be good hug alien Marxist and say let's take a look at the plus and the minus and make the best decision that we can.
We'll make mistakes but we'll all make them together it won't be one of us making a dictatorial decision
you know marks developed the notion of the dictatorship of the proletariat not as the notion of how government is done I'm sorry not Marx Lenin did that
not as an ocean of how our government works but as a notion of what the Practical reality is
the dictatorship of needs key decisions is not made by some sitting Council it's made by each little capitalist in his her relationships with the workers in the workplace which is why marks focused has analysis
on that point.
By the way I can sketch for you right now so it doesn't look in the background what the alternative is let's go there okay it goes right back to what I said earlier.
The workers of themselves the collection of employees together appropriate their own Surplus and decide
democratically what to do with it which includes the decision of whether or not to buy a machine.
And whether or not
to use the machine and the savings it might allow.
To be handled by more Leisure for themselves or as a fund for new developments.
In technology or new products or whatever they want and you know this this is an old idea in human marks love that towards the end of his life he.
He started reading extensively in anthropology and one of the reasons he did that toward the end of his life was because he kept discovering.
That in this Society in that one coming here in the United States that there were examples of people who organized.
Their production in precisely this way as a collective Democratic community in which everybody had an equal voice so we all together decide democratically what to produce
how to produce where to produce
and what to do with the output we all helped to produce so let's do it in you know in this country where democracy is a.
Valued nearly everybody subscribes to think about it this way the stunning contradiction that there is a place in our society where democracy has never been allowed to enter.
The workplace in the workplace a tiny group of people unaccountable to the rest of them.
The employer whether that's an individual a family a partnership or a corporate board of directors tiny group of people
controls economically a vast mass of employees
those employees don't elect those people have no clue nothing there is no accountability it is the most undemocratic mm an arrangement imaginable.
And this Society insists on calling itself Democratic when it has organized the minor matter of producing everything in a in a way that is it the direct its autocratic
so to push back a few things so one is the idea of this Society calling itself Democratic is that the government is elected democratically and the government is able to
pressure
the workplace through the process of Regulation you pass laws of the boundaries of how you know minimum wage all those kinds of things that's the one idea the other is there is,
natural force within the capitalist when there's no monopolies of competition being the accountability so if your shitty boss.
The employer the employee in the capitalist system as the freedom to move to another company work for a better boss so that that creates pressure on the employers and the bosses that's at least the idea that you
there's two boundaries of you not misbehaving one is the law of the regulatory regulations bypassed by the government Democratic and the second is
because there's always Alternatives in theory then that puts pressure on everyone to behave well because you can always leave
so I mean that's kinds of accountability but what you're saying is that does not result in any in a significant enough accountability or the employer.
That avoids exploitation of the worker absolutely I mean whatever accountability you get in those mechanisms and let me respond to that and then on the counter argument.
First competition.
Here again we have to be Hague aliens just a little competition destroys itself.
It doesn't need any out the whole point of competition is to beat the other guy if I can produce the same product as the other guy.
Either a better quality or a lower price or maybe both then I win because the customers will come to me
because my price is lower or my quality is better and they'll leave the other guy he'll go out of business now let's follow when he goes out of business because I won the competition
he fires his workers.
I hire them because I'm now going to be able to serve a market he can't serve anymore so I'm in I'm going to buy the used equipment I'm good and thereby many.
Become fuel Monopoly is the product of competition it's not the antithesis it's the product
well let's see that's what comes from where there's another there's another element to the system where there's always a new guy that comes in there isn't,
there is one that's the that's the dream the entrepreneurial Spirit of a free.
You know of the United States for example of a capitalist system is you can be,
broke and one day have a strong idea build up a business that takes on Google and Facebook and Twitter and all the different.
Car for GM which is what you know you look at Tesla for example right that's the American dream one of the many.
Ideals of the American dream is you can move
from dirt poor to being the richest person in the world but and it can happen it can happen but you're no that's like that's like you can win the lottery.
No that's not quite know the lottery is complete luck here you can work your ass off if you have a Dodge a better in the lottery
that's not that's not true there's a lot of new businesses how many Tesla's do you do you know just as a really bad example because the car company the automotive sector is so difficult,
to the operator such a thin margin of profit they're probably a good example of like capitalism just completely coming to a halt in terms of lack of innovation because you know
that's a very complicated industry because of the supply chain it all so much come on they have their uniqueness as you're quite right.
But so does every other industry the one thing that's common is that many become few what you can also have is when you have a few
they jack up the price they make an enormous profit and in the irony of capitalism Marx would love this they begin to.
Incentivize people to break into this industry because the few remaining are making a wild amount of profit because they are a few and can trigger the market to make it work like that for them
so the reason every mm every small capitalist is trying to
build market share that's a polite way polite way of saying they want to become a monopolist or to be more exact and oligopolist one of the handful of firms that dominate that's what they're there for but yeah to push back a little bit also because that's,
could be this is a question also do you think we're in danger of oversimplifying capitalism the completed removes
the basic decency of human beings so if you give me a choice to press the press a button,
to get rid of the competition and that but that's going to lead to a lot of suffering there's a lot of people at the heads of companies that won't press that button that it's not in the calculation is not just money
it's human well-being to so like the think.
I yes every intern who and I don't live in the same place that so you're saying that the forces of capitalism Takeover in the minds of the people at the top you got,
and then did during they cease Being Human
this is the basic I wouldn't I would have any in your model of humans they lose track of the better angels of their nature and they just become cogs in the machine but there just happened to be the cop I would put it differently that
the system is so set up it's a little bit like natural selection
the guys who may own I could say the women to doesn't matter the people who make it up through the layers of the bureaucracy and get to the top in these things,
have had to do things along the way that becomes selective if they can't stand it because they have that human quality and they are people I had known them.
They're the ones running an air B&B in Vermont.
They checked they went there and they said I'm not doing this anymore I'm not going to treat people like that I'm gonna make a lovely place in Vermont with my husband or my wife or whatever and I'm going to be you know enjoy of the people that come by and,
be a decent amount of course of course but the system selects.
The Firm you know if you don't do what has to be done to make the profit go up
you're toast there anyway there the rest of the people who vote for you are going to kick you out you can tell them I'm all day long what a lovely person you are,
they're going to look at you and wonder what happened to you how did you even get this far with the lovely person horse that's not okay it's not necessarily just lovely person so maybe.
My I'll just say my bias is the people I know are especially at the top of companies are in the tech sector but where innovation.
Is such a big part of it so I think a lot of the things we're talking about is when there's not much innovation in the system.
So
Innovation usually comes in the history of capitalism Innovation comes in spurts there's the electric period that chemistry period the nuclear period there's now,
whatever you want to call it the artificial intelligence or robotics or computer it doesn't it comes and then there's a flurry as everything is reorganized around whatever the newest,
technology is,
and then you have a period where you can get excited about that and the very rich people come to the top can talk endlessly as they always do about Innovation but again you know it really is
this is a recurring kind of debate and a recurring kind of issue for me.
How do I put this in a way that.
No I don't mean to offend so I think please please no no no I don't I don't want to but.
The problem with capitalism is and maybe you'll like this the problem of capitalism is not that it is the one thing that's consistent with human nature that's what its Defenders would like to have us believe,
but if anything I would argue the opposite
that it is such a contradiction two parts of our nature not other parts.
That there it can never quite make it there's always going to be the people who don't go along with it,
people you're talking about who do quit along the way or maybe a few of them actually make it to the top by God knows what hook or what crook that they did it.
Most of them go and you know why because their humanity is contradicted by what it is they're being asked.
To do I mean the corporate sector this year just to give you an idea.
CEOs are jacking up there.
Their wage package they're already out of whack I mean the average CEO pay is now 33 hundred times what the average worker pay is.
But they're jacking it up even more why because that's what's happening in their universe that's,
they're all doing it and they have to do each one of them justifies that I have to do though was I'd lose my guide in the next one which of course it's true but is no comfort for the mass of people who aren't CEOs for whom this argument is very exciting so.
There are they're doing that at a time when the American people can't cope they've just gone through the covid disaster.
They've gone through the worst second worst economic crash of capitalism in our history after two years of this one two punch they got an inflation.
Third punch and we are now predicting Rising interest rates in a recession at the end of the year or early next year you can't do this to a working-class when this was done to the German working-class in the 1920s,
Hitler was the result you keep doing that in this country were already watching it you're going to get that too.
You're ready getting bits and pieces you can't this is a quiet suffering amidst the wrong class that's growing taking out on it can turn to anger some little 18 year old kid who has to go
three hours in his car and blow away people in a supermarket why it happens every day in this country every day.
So the that anger Rises up in those little ways now and bigger things just like actually by the way there's one more thing.
On the rationality and this goes to Elon Musk
if you're interested
49,000 people were killed in automobile accidents this last year number was just released yesterday 49,000
automobiles are the single largest pollutant in the country they use up an enormous amount of energy they they use up at Norma's on our resources.
There is a way
to make Transportation much more rational and we've known it for decades it's called mass transportation it's a really
beautifully maintained Crystal Clear clean frequent system of buses trains street rod trolleys Vans it could easily be done in this Society.
In fact I once did a project that is estimated cost 30 billion dollars that's less than we're sending to Ukraine to do this to reconfigure it.
The public transit system where everywhere this country all the major measurable this country's overwhelmingly metropolitan area well if you are really has to be more than 30 billion good,
but was a few years ago Cheryl you're saying it but I'm using a lot of it's insane right it's not crazy stuff it's a reasonable number I right but there's a let me just finish the pointer yes okay so.
I'm trying to be rational here
if we have a climate crisis which everyone tells me we do
if it's got a lot to do with fossil fuels which everybody tells me he has to do and with the use of the fossil fuel particularly for the automobile then the solution to the problem would be mass transit
we don't we're doing nothing to make that happen nothing well there's you know on,
You could argue that autonomous vehicles is a kind of public transit because it's going to be reusable Vehicles it will end,
in theory car ownership so you just have a more kind of distributed public transit if it happens but you know that that's a side effect his major goal and the major goal of the other companies that are busy
squeezing to get his share of the pie smaller so they have some for General Motors Toyota all of them are making electric cars though so
what they've done is they've replaced the individual car with fossil fuel with another individual car.
That's fucking nuts what are you doing what at one of the things they're doing but automation is also nothing but on the Elan side there's also hilariously named boring company yes which is working on tunnels which is actually expanding the.
He's the the flexibility you might have
to start playing with ideas of public transit I think listen I'm now partially living in Austin Texas that I don't know if they know
what a public transit system is period yes there's a most of American constructs yeah they're well there's this is an interesting so.
The older that by the way footnote the older this city the more likely it has public transportation so you're saying Boston is the best example yes,
have you been able yeah of course you have a place in Boston with the street Railway Boston is your case study of how to do this
because they've been doing it all along New York's pretty good too there's a Trader yeah New York I would say is better than Boston because there's their technology also helps you out
to do the public transit better so it's almost like Boston's a little too old but yes I get your point but there is a.
The the Ford F-150 pickup truck symbolizes something about America and there is a practical nature to the fact
in order to do public transit in order to
do some of these things that you're talking about with the working-class there has to be a central planning component or there has to be a centralized component and America is very much.
Based on the idea of.
At least in recent times while see from the founding of individualism of respecting individual Freedom are you worried that.
In order to bring some of these ideas of Marxism to life you would trample on individual freedoms.
For me both sure for me Marxism is
a way to enhance the individual freedom of the mass of people who have had that freedom eroded under the capitalist oh that's a motive for my Marxism.
It was for Mark's to heal of the French Revolution he loved the liberte egalite a fraternity the great three and then democracy the American contribution if you like he believed in all of that,
his critique of capitalism was it promised it.
And then never delivered it and the reason you have to go beyond it is because it didn't deliver what it had.
Promise of for me it is the Fulfillment of.
Of a genuine but again I'm a galleon marks so if you want.
Individualism for me is not the way it's set up in this Society some sort of antithesis.
To the government I think an immense Khan has been pulled on the American people and the con works like this.
You know what's bad and what's dangerous and threatens you.
It's the government the government is going to come in and tell you what to do the government's going to run your life the government's the problem there really is no other way to explain the following in American politics.
Large numbers of people lose their homes in a downturn like the so-called Great Recession of 2008.
Who do they blame the government large numbers of people go unemployed and what is the media all about the government.
If I were a capitalist I'd love this I kicked the workers by throwing them out of their home and they don't get angry with me beginning with the government.
Fire large numbers of people I have no responsibility for what happens to them as a result of having no job and no income and they get angry at the senator.
I'm laughing all the way to the bank this is a genius stroke in theory but there is if you look at government.
Because you said accountability in the capitalist system has no accountability there's some pushback I gave on the accountability I think there's some accountability we can discuss in a hegelian wait who.
There's more accountability for I would say that in theory government is
perfectly accountable as the whole point of a democratic system is you vote people in English practice right there's a giant growing bureaucracy
that is accountable only on the surface there's two parties.
That Seymour the same are the same media somehow integrated into making the the same two parties as just wearing different colored shirts or to seem like they're very,
opposed in are arguing and bitterly arguing the calling each other's as far as nice nasty names and all those kinds of things okay but that's government.
So what exactly is worst I had government or companies why are we asking that question.
These are the twins look what you were what you were able to say about Republicans and Democrats just out with which I agree.
I would say the same thing about corporations and the government this is the same people literally let's go to Churchill which one is the
which one is course let's go to church or like democracy is the worst form of government except all the other ones or whatever so this kind of same idea
which one exactly is worse because to me it seems like which one between what a government and Industry and companies it's because government.
Plagued by I will call it corruption because the corruption of.
Bureaucratic paperwork and then because it but they're not account there doesn't seem to be a serious accountability again.
Will not see we're not living on the same Planet the greatest practitioners of central planning our corporations.
Ilan has an operation like General Motors Ford IBM or any of the other Mega corpse.
They have to plan they buy up companies
because they don't want to deal with in the market they don't want the insecurity the uncertainty of having to buy their inputs or sell their outputs to somebody they don't control.
They want the professor to teach the genius of a market they hate
the market and when they grow to be big they keep buying whoever they were dealing with before so they could better control them which requires them then to plan the production and distribution of goods
inside rather than buying them in the market.
The model of the government is it a private Corporation I have spent my life give you an example in American universities.
Big ones famous were not just as a student but as a professor I have a dozen school I teach now at the new school here is another one right they will model themselves after businesses they model the.
You can attack the bureaucracy of universities good reason that mess but they're proudly modeling themselves
on organizing their bill bureaucracy in a businesslike manner uh-huh so you're looking at a difference which isn't there the government and the private sector
our partners and both of them wouldn't have it any other way the corporations want that
from the government and the government now knows that the please the corporation's is the number-one objective they have because that's how they keep their jobs and keep their system going and so for all practical purposes
this is this is the same people but there's a important differences that
I don't know if they're fundamental or just consequence of history but if you have government they're accountable in a different way than companies companies are accountable by especially if you have a
consumer they're accountable by sort of consumer spending or not spending their money on whatever the heck the company is selling the government is accountable by votes
and it seems like government unlike companies for most of companies history.
Is always too big to fail meaning it can always just print money it can always save itself and that creates a bureaucracy you never.
You rarely pay the cost of having made bad decisions if you're in government you distribute the blame.
And it's very unclear who's responsible for bad decisions so bad decisions and government accumulate so you become more and more and more inefficient and.
More and more poor in your decision-making terms of you said public transit should we build a public transit system in this city or not that's a difficult decision that's an interesting decision I would say it's very often very good decision.
But whoever makes that decision should be accountable for a good or bad decision and it seems like companies are more accountable they pay,
they feel the pain
of having made a bad decision more because it can go bankrupt they I mean there's much more day-to-day pressure to make good engineering decisions government doesn't seem to be under the same level of pressure.
Is do you disagree with that I disagree with everything in my history.
Pushes me you may be living I may be living a different who knows a planet or taking a different sort of drug I won't I won't mention the name but.
I personally had a lot to do with a very large company here in the United States here in the New York area and.
It involved two brothers and a family who built it up into a huge corporation one of the brothers was.
Kind of the Dynamo
of the family.
And he was more responsible anybody else building it up
but he took care of his brothers he had a nice feeling about his brother so the one brother who could not.
You know without help tie his shoes became a vice president.
Got an enormous salary got a beautiful office in a skyscraper not that many blocks from where I'm sitting right now and.
That was the way that family handle that company.
And all of his relatives that were somewhere in this company doing a variety of whatever because.
And my experience with this.
And because I went to the school's I told you all my experiences with that group of people corporate has a full of those stories you know.
They made mistake after mistake which they were told you what didn't-didn't undermined there they were always able
to blame somebody else something else that's great them through and had they not been able to they would have been replaced by another person who did the same thing for as long as they could.
And they knew it they would talk about it at family of that's how I know.
Yeah that's I mean I understand that you want the outside world to look at it this way but.
Well my experience interest but again what's that kind of thing the risk of saying human nature again I wonder what.
Kind of system,
alas for that more versus versus less this is the question of the I will call that let's put that under the umbrella term of corruption
which system allows for more corruption remember that the way I defined the different system is not more or less government it's more or less allowing a democratic workplace yeah reconfiguring it what what happens,
when everybody
Matt has a vote when you have to explain.
What the strategies are what the alternatives are to a larger number of people than a board of directors or a major shareholders or whoever it is that most companies are responsible to
and now you've got a whole different Universe it's not a small group of people can't be hidden the way it's normally hidden most of it and on and on and on
this is you know worker coops is what this is called in many parts of the world so it's not that I'm advocating something that's never been seen before not at all
the Marxism I understand is too,
pick from historical precedence the things that we think will work
better and I think if all the people in an Enterprise just to drive the point home democratically decided they would never give two or three individuals a hundred million dollars while everybody else can send their kids to college a that can do that
so just to return this to address this.
Point about the particular implementation of Marxism that was the early days but in the Soviet Union why did.
Stalinism for example lead to so much Bloodshed do you think and human suffering is there any elements within the ideas of Marxism.
That catalyzed.
The kind of government the kind of system that led to that bloodshed.
I don't think so I think there are many things that led to the Bloodshed and so all that Stalin's regimes did and.
You know I spent 10 years of my life with another Economist writing a book
about that to try to explain from a Marxist position the rise and fall of the Soviet Union you mean you might want to take a look at it sometime but
there I'm going to say a few things now but all of those things are spelled out in great detail with loads of empirical,
evidence at cetera in that in that work let me start with you know playing a little bit with with Hegel.
The biggest impact that Marxism had
on the Soviet Union was really not so much what the Soviet Union did but what the rest of the world did,
you had a really interesting move and I'll give you a parallel sometime today the move was.
That the old Russian regime collapsed World War 1 just it fell apart there's our and all of that
it couldn't it couldn't survive it already been in trouble there was a revolution 1905 there was the loss of the war to Japan and then if you know Russian history which I assume you do
you'll know that there was a lot leading up to the collapse in 1917
and in some ways it was fortuitous that the.
Political group very small that could seize the opportunity of that collapse happened to be marxists.
You know earlier on with kerensky the first government that tried
it wasn't people all that impressed by Marxism label people more skeptical and would not have been called Marxist probably in by history they couldn't they try
they couldn't Lenin and his associates the were able to take over from them later in that same year.
The rest of the world though was horrified.
The rest of the world saw Marxism having taken this immense leap from being a political party of movement.
Critical of capitalism yes but still not challenging the power now it had the power and in a big country.
And they freaked out.
If you know American history this country the leadership of this country went completely berserk I mean we had
repression of the left the likes of which we had not seen before sat the 20s were a time of Palmer Raids in Boston the sacko Vanzetti trials and he really
Grim hostility and you had the four countries agreeing to invade the Soviet Union to try to crush the revolution the US.
Britain France and Japan all attacked 10,000 American troops.
So what you had right away was an ocean in the west that this was.
This was Unthinkable this one there was a great professor at Princeton Meyer forget his first name.
Who wrote his wonderful book about all American foreign policy since 1917 has been obsessed,
with Russia even now this this fight with Ukraine is half about Russia as if Russia still was the Soviet Union as if people haven't figured out.
That was a big change back in a 1989 and 90 you know Yeltsin and and Putin are not what
what you had before or at least they're not Lennon they may not be so different from some of the other but I case.
So you have one factor was the utter isolation the utter,
condemnation the global I mean Rosa Luxemburg is I mean I assume you know the in Rosa Luxemburg is hunted down in the streets,
Berlin she's a critical blendin's by the way but she's a leftist hunted down and hacked into bits.
Killed see you are attributing some he's around some of the Bloodshed to the fact that basically the rest of the world turned away.
Turned against not turn against so you turn to guess is the butter with very yeah I mean not in order of importance but it's it's a very important part of the psychology of being you know.
It's what you would call paranoid if they weren't quite as much evidence that they did there was a lot to be afraid of at that time nobody had ever done it look you could see the effects of it by Stalin inventing the idea
which had no support at first that you could have socialism in one country that was thought to be ridiculous that socialism was
internationalism Marx was it Marx was against capitalism everywhere it was you know workers of the World Unite not workers of Russia unite where workers of the
he had to go through a procedure of kind of coming to terms with the fact that the
Revolution he had in Russia which was tried in Berlin was tried in Munich was tried in Budapest was tried in Seattle here they all failed
they all fit and he's left so the French would say dude cell right here all alone that's one.
The second thing is economic isolation Russia is a poor country and it needed.
What he got before the war which were heavy investments from the French and the Germans particularly but others too now this was all cut off and you can see the replay with the sanctions programs it's weird too.
We're gonna do it again we're gonna do it again we have to do we we had the world is different and the sanctions don't work but.
They're going to trial to try because it's the history but that culture was its today is completely different Russia's a different place today,
but Russia has China and that changes everything and they don't get that here yet but they will yeah there's a very complicated Dynamic with China even it with India yep but.
Porter's sorry Jill
yeah sorry to say human nature may change at a slower Pace yes the the does job has occurred to me as well so is there a
Can you steal man the case or consider the case that there's something about the implementation of Marxism
maybe because of the idealistic nature of focusing on the working class and Workers Unite then naturally,
leads to formation of a dictatorial force a dictator that says let us temporarily.
Give power to this person to manage some of the details of how to run the democracy.
Of giving voice to the workers so they get to choose and then that naturally leads to a dictator and there's naturally in human nature.
The power and absolute power as the old adage goes corrupts absolutely is it possible that whenever you focus on Marxist ideals.
You're going to end up with a dictator and often when you give too much power to anyone human or small number of people you're going to get into huge amount of trouble.
You pushed things together there that I would separate I think if you if you give,
pushed as a dish to yeah German the if you remember I told you my mother was born in Germany and and then new dad is French.
Yeah but he was born in Mets if you know George European it's a city on the border of France and Germany if you come from the other aisle stations I was a student in German
so they're german-speaking fashionable
it's a bilingual because it's been back and forth so many times in medieval days already that it literally go from one store to another the proprietor here
is French in the proprietor there is German but they all speak both languages because
you don't speak either of them I speak Russian Russian but not dramatically crania node you I it took French for four years in high school but I forgotten all of it
I I remember the romance and the spirit of the language but not the details I'm sure I can remember if you allocate power.
Unequally undemocratic lie and you do it for a very long period of time.
And you do it on Monday many levels of ideology it is not surprising
that it sticks and it stays and you can make a political revolution or even an economic Revolution and you will Discover it has a life of its own and it's going to take a long time
before people don't if you have a religious tradition Christianity that Prides itself on its
monotheism and that it doesn't want to have anything to do with the old Greek mythology when there was Zeus and Diana and all the others and they were very human-like but instead we have one.
Who is the absolute beginning in a yo what are you doing you're teaching people.
An authority line that comes from the individual if you have a sequence of Kings if in your feudal manner the Lord sits.
Call the landline he has unspeakable power over everything that goes on.
And you do this for thousands of years you can make a Russian Revolution in 1917 but if you imagine you've gotten away from all that people assume without ever thinking about it you're going to have trouble,
Stalin is figured here.
As the originator of his situation he wasn't he didn't never had that power he may have thought that but I don't he's the product.
Look the Cuban people made Fidel who really wasn't that kind of guy.
He's a baseball playing lawyer that's what he was but they made him into Colossus not it's not the product of History,
no no it's it was the system's feudalism the judicature it was the structures and institutions that cultivated in people
a mentality that has its own Rhythm and doesn't take doesn't follow the calendar of a political revolution that's the fundamental question is there something about communism that creates them and mentality that.
Enables somebody like Stalin or mile.
I think it's the social issues and problems that Society has that make them then go to what they find familiar to what seems to make sense and he's the guy look let me give you an example from American history.
The Republican party has traditionally in this country been the party of private Enterprise and minimum government.
Incomes Trump runs for office in 2016 is elected.
Okay what does he do he commences the most massive tax increase and the most massive government intervention in the worlds of of Economics that we have had for deck,
nobody says anything the Republicans gave and the Democrats largely too.
The cave he can he can.
He can throw a tariff on anything he gets up in front of the American people and he says the Chinese will pay the Tariff.
That's not what a tariff is somehow a tariff Works he would flunk a quarter a freshman course in economics which everybody knows everybody who teaches these courses no it doesn't matter.
He still calling the shots,
what is going on here is that a society has come to a point where it can't solve its problems and it begins what to tap into older
forms and all of the less a fair and all of the individualism
fumbling and suddenly the Republican party is going on now they're going to make abortion illegal the government is telling you what you can do with your uterus.
What.
What the government is being given more and more and more and more power they're hoping what do they like the government no too desperate.
This is not a pro-government and it wasn't in Russia Island they were in a desperate fix and so and he took advantage.
To which degree did.
Would you say Market Marx's ideas led to the creation of the,
national socialism party of German Workers has the Nazi party the fascist party in the 30s and the 40s
at the head of on was Hitler which I just recently learned he was.
Employee number 7 of the party or whatever the seventh person to have joined the party,
and have created one of the most consequential and Powerful political parties in the history of the 20th century what degree did marks
ideas Marxism ideas have to play it is the National Socialist Party of German Workers right.
Workers not so this this is such that Nazi analysis anesthesia Deutsche arbeiterpartei
German worker party worker party National Socialist German Workers Party
so but here's the history and they care about the person that did you just use the workers as a populist message the only thing that Marxism.
Did for mr. Hitler was provide him
with his stepping stone to power but had nothing no other he didn't know anything about it didn't care anything about nor did the people around him here's the story of what happened there which I know
largely through my own family and plus my own history the work that I did.
The most successful socialist party in Europe was the German party
it started around 1870 marks that was still alive some of his own family were leaders fed nonetheless Alan other's daughters.
By the end of the century it was the second most important party in Germany nobody understood it it was over what it was almost as big a shock to the Europeans.
As was the Russian Revolution in 1917 here was a political party that was now in every German City in every German Town
powerful and enjoying its rise up that's my family's involved in this Sunday I really do know the story
it meant that starting around 19 6 7 8.
If you wanted to have any kind.
Of presence in the German working-class you had to use the word socialist yeah to otherwise they wouldn't pay attention.
The other part is called themselves Catholic that Germany is divided the upper tooth the northern two-thirds is Protestant
the southern third is Catholic Munich and Bavaria is Catholic and every other part of Germany basically he's promised you could be in the Catholic party that was the South
or you could be in various conservative.
Prussian and other body but if you wanted to have a presence in the working class which was growing everyone in Germany very powerful
capitalist country expanding like crazy at this time you know Germany was the major competitor to Britain for the empire
the United States was was coming up to but it was Germany and u.s. taking over from Britain's Empire
so the German working class was it so anybody who wanted to approach.
The working class in whatever way had to come to terms and be friendly to socialism.
Other parties did this to just like Hitler they put the word socialist in their party but they wanted to make it clear that they weren't.
Anything to do with the Soviet Union or alien doing Marxism so they put the word Nacional not see is the first four letters of national nazionale in German and they see is how you spell.
National in the German national socialism but definite Communists that's right
the killed comedy they fought communist in the street they had pitched battles they literally threatened each other's existence
and they lie and the first people and he arrested and put in jail we're not Jews and Gypsies and all the other people he eventually kill it was communists.
They were the number one and socialist right behind him why because up until he takes power January of 1933 that's when Hitler
takes power the last elections two of them in 1932 the Socialist and communist the vote together 50% of the vote in Germany so.
He appealed to them at the German manufacturer the German capitalist and he said the Communists and socialists are going to win.
You won't and you you're just the capitalist you have too few people you need a mass base and I'm the only one that can do that.
Let's just the populist message that he used that's right but it was explicitly done as a deal
the the ruling group said to Hindenburg the old Prussian man who was in charge of the German government at the time you have to invite Hitler to form a new government.
Otherwise you would never have thought he'd call Hitler nasty names before the Prussian aristocracy looked down on Hitler as in Austin little funny man with a mustache who was Austria wasn't in German you know the mood for them that mattered so
he comes in as the enemy the Smasher of socialism and communism which he immediately does.
Only people who don't know or care about the history pick up on the word you know it's like there are people here in the United States who like to say.
We are not a democracy we are Republic which is like saying I'm not a banana I'm a fruit
you have to explain to these people bananas so you have to explain the people yes we were Republic
but we have a commitment to democracy as a way to govern the Republic because the say you're Republic doesn't imply what kind of government you have to go through that with people so they kind of get as certain words
have power beyond their actual meaning that used in communication whether it's negative,
like racist or positive like freedom of speech or democrat or double Daddy yeah and then you use that to mean something Wells or negative.
What is it stop
Donnie stop being a socialist are some whatever whatever that means that's not even use doesn't any kind of philosophical or economic sense so let's fast forward to today right you mentioned Bernie Sanders right
there's another popular figure that represents some of ideas of maybe let's call it Democratic socialism and maybe let's try to start
that sneak up on a definition of what that could possibly mean but AOC Alexandria Ocasio Cortez she's from
these parts yes greens so maybe if you can comment on Bernie Sanders or ALC
are they open to some ideas and Marxism are they representing those ideas well in both the economic and the political sense.
Okay.
Where do I begin yeah the social the Socialist movement predates marks was always larger than marks and has gone on to develop.
Separately after marks is death so can we pause on that actually King is there a nice way to
to delineate draw a line between Marxism and Socialism or or if Marxism is kind of a part of socialism.
That's been he can you speak to like maybe the try to Define once again what Marxism is and what socialism is right.
Marxism is a systematic analysis.
Heavily focused on economics and as I said earlier devoted to mostly a critique.
Of capitalism
and that's its strength.
How it does that how it poses the questions how it analyzes the way capitalism works that is really the Forte of the Marxist tradition.
Socialism is a bigger broader tent within which Marxism.
Figures it's there so that people who aren't Marxist or nonetheless aware of Marxism like it more or less study it more or less but it's a broader notion
that I like to use this sentence to describe it's a broad idea that we can do better than some than capitalism and really
there are all kinds of things about capitalism that are not what we as modern citizens of the world.
Think are adequate that we are in a tradition.
That goes back to all the people who thought they could do better than slavery and all the people who thought they could do better than feudalism.
We've made progress feudalism was a progress over slavery.
Capitalism was a progress over both of them and progress hasn't stopped and we are the people who in a variety of ways want.
The progress.
To go for the further and are not held back by believing that capitalism is somehow the best Beyond which we cannot go or even think we find that to be in the worst sense of the word.
A reactionary way of thinking and where that large
Community many of us are not interested in economics all that much we don't think that's
the focal area we are socialists for example because we want to do something to deal with
climate change to we think the world is about to kill itself physically and we want to take steps with other people to stop that to me to fix that etcetera etcetera.
So that's for me a kind of difference is a little difficult to say because there's no other figure.
Like marks that has an equal.
Impact an equal place within the broad socialist tradition and the only tradition that comes close might be
the anarchists tradition but that's very specialized and
that's a whole nother kind of conversation and whatever you say the influence of the great anarchists thinkers kropotkin bakunin sorell in France and others still doesn't amount.
To the impact that Marx and Marxism have had so far that could change but I mean up to this point that's the.
Um
I think that's a way of understanding the relationship yeah that's an interesting that some of the ideas within anarchism and of course it's a one of the more varied,
disciplines right there such.
Maybe by definition such Variety in their thinkers but they kind of stand for a
dismantling of a power center and that.
If not equates tends to rhyme with some of the ideas of socialism absolutely so where you have the you know there's a whole train of thought in socialist ideas that in Marxist ideas that uses the phrase quote
the withering away of the state that's a quotation from Lennon.
People should understand that's a quotation from Lennon and it was made by Lenin positive in other words Lennon was saying.
That's a good thing that's something we stand for
we want to create the conditions under which there is a will because you remember the the Communist so what did they weren't called that at first in Russia before the Revolution they were just socialists they were hunted down and persecuted by the government left and right they had no love for the government the government was their literal everyday enemy
and being critical of government didn't just mean this particular government but of the whole.
Being a Marxist you always ask the questions of the social constitution of whatever it is you're struggling against so there was this interest why is the state so,
especially because if you understand feudalism particularly early feudalism it didn't have powerful states one of Lenin's greatest books is called the economic history of Russia and he goes back centuries
the huge book in three or four inches thick and I'm one of the few people who've read it and.
He's very good about the absence.
Of a strong central government in many parts of fuel including inside Russia but also in other parts of Europe the development of a powerful Central State comes towards the end of feudalism as it is desperate to hold on.
Which ought to be suggestive that maybe the turn to powerful governments
here in the United States or in Europe and huh is maybe also because this system is exhausted and can't go on and has to Marshall every last,
bit of power it can not to be.
Lost in history it would be interesting to see what the Soviet Union would look like if Lana never died hi.
A lot of people have asked that question over the years a lot of people.
There is Stalin sliding in in the middle of the night erasing the withering away of the state part yes exactly,
so just to return briefly back to AOC and Bernie Sanders what are your thoughts about these modern political figures that represent some of these ideas and they sometimes refer to those ideas as Democratic socialism right.
The crucial thing about Bernie and about AOC and this is particularly true about Bernie because ALCS much younger and Bernie's at older men Bernie.
Being roughly my age has been around.
Formatively as a student as an activist then coming up through the ranks and in Burlington Vermont as a mayor and all the rest
he lived through one for lack of a better term I would call Cold War America and the Taboo in Cold War America running from around 1945 six.
To the present I mean really never stopped was
manichean worldview the United States is good it defines democracy and the Soviet Union is awful it defines whatever the opposite of democracy should be called good here evil there.
It was taken so far that even in among the ranks of.
Academic individuals it was impossible.
Have a conversation I mean I can't tell just make it very personal the number of times I would raise my hand in my classes at Harvard.
Or Stanford or Yale.
And I would ask the question that had something to do with Marxism because I was studying it on my own that there were no courses to teach this to me except by people who trashed
you know that other than that and I didn't want that so I would ask a question.
And I would see in the faces of my teachers both those I didn't much care for and those who were good teachers that I liked fear,
it's just fear they didn't want to go there they didn't want to answer my question and I after a while I got to know some of them and I found out why
because you don't know how the rest of the class is going to understand this either they would have to say I don't know which would be the honest truth for many of them but Professor does not want to say in a classroom I don't know that's it's not cool,
or they'd have to if they knew,
that have to say something that indicated there's no really much and they want to go to do that or they wouldn't know something.
And maybe that would be because they were interested.
They did not want the rest of the students to begin to say hello you know Professor Smith well you know he's interested hmm.
This is not good for your career you don't know how this is gonna play out who's gonna say what to whom,
and I could see in their faces what I later learned because they told me don't come to my office hours you took we're in the office we can talk about but I'm that's how bad it was.
Is it not still pretty much.
In my field the great so-called debate I find it boring but great debate for my colleagues is
between what's called neoclassical economics and Keynesian economics neoclassical
the government should stay out of the economy and work less a fair or liberalism and the Keynesian saying no you you crazy neoclassical if you do that you'll have great depressions and the system will collapse you need the government to come in to solve the problems to fix the,
weaknesses.
And they hate each other and they throw each other out of their jobs one of the very few things they can do together that they agree on is keeping people like Meowth.
That they can find common ground to do so I had to learn it all on my soul why am I telling you this because.
This taboo means that all of the complicated developments within Marxism and within socialism
of the post-world war two period the vast bulk of all of that is unknown.
Not just to the average American person but to the average American academic to the average American who thinks of himself or herself as an intellectual
I have had to spend a ridiculous amount of my time explaining Soviet history have no idea.
Or saying there's this man lukacs a Hungarian Marxist he really had interesting.
Or to explain that gramsci was not a great literary critic he was head of the Communist Party of Italy for most of his adult life
what does that mean what you like G she is a literary critic but they were and they didn't even know they don't even know it's been erased.
It's a little bit like stories I've heard about
Trotsky and his influence kind of erased in the Soviet Union because he obviously fell out of favor and so somehow all of his writings many of which are very interesting and complicated anyway so.
What you going to have in this country is a slow.
Awakening of socialism from a long hibernation called the Cold War I never expected to be very honest with you,
that I would live to see I knew it would come because of these things always do but I didn't expect to see it so I have been surprised.
As have a lot of us that when it starts to happen it happens fast
so the you see Bernie is an early sign of the Awakening absolutely for the corridor to accept the idea was always a social we all knew and everybody who paid attention he didn't I did.
But 2016 he go he makes a decision momentous to run for president he's just a senator from Vermont Vermont is one of the smallest,
states in the union people who live in Vermont love to tell you that there are more cows than people in Vermont Sentret Sentret so here from this little State this elderly gentleman,
with a New York City accent runs for office and says I'm a socialist and when they attack and he doesn't run away I must do so.
I'm a socialist now he had been he wasn't that it wasn't a secret that suddenly got out.
But the great question and I don't mind telling you because I went to the right schools I know a lot of people in the you know Janet Yellen was my classmate at Yale and stuff like that.
So I was speaking with a high official of the democratic party and I said well what do you think about Bernie entering the race.
Makes no difference if they get one percent of the vote all right he was wrong yeah they had no idea what was coming
but the truth is I didn't either it wasn't just that he didn't get it I thought his 1% was probably right
so we were both wrong yeah change can happen fast do you think AOC might be president one day yeah.
Possible possible and but two things number one it's fast number two.
It's going to go in the following Direction I would guess you begin with the most moderate.
Calm non-confrontational socialism
you can imagine so not a OCR Bernie no no they are not confrontational in my judgment in terms of the ideas of socialism yeah I mean they're both very feisty they're feisty personally but not but not ideologically gotta you know she is.
Bernie is also.
You know in honest moments and they're both really are pretty honest Folks at least in my experience.
In honest moments Bernie will tell you that his what he Advocates his Democratic socialism is pretty much what FDR was in the 1930s it was a kind of popular government.
Tax the rich a lot more than you do now to provide a lot more support for the working class than you do now
that's not a fundamental change that's what he means by socialism when he talks about it and he's asked for examples he mentions Denmark a lot okay that
that that's consistent that's the softest kind of socialism and that's where we're going to start in a country coming out of hibernation.
Pretty soon it's already happening,
they'll be people who need and want to go further in the direction of socialism then Bernie and AOC are comfortable with you can already see that the shoots of it now.
You know AOC voted together with most of the others to support the money for Ukraine.
Okay that a lot of people in the in the Socialist movement do not support that and that's going to happen I don't know exactly how that's going to work out but.
That should give people an idea there are disagreements and they're going,
faster and they're gonna drink they don't let people know so people in the social sphere do support money
from the United States in the large amounts that it is being sent to Ukraine is it because of it's a fundamentally the military-industrial complex is a capitalist institution kind of thing.
No the what the when there's some people for whom that's the issue then there are people for whom this is you know it's guns and butter and why are we.
Why are we over there when we have such needs at home that are being neglected and yeah and then there are people who.
Well go back to what we talked about the beginning who are more like London and Deb's that this is this is a fight between.
Western capitalism and Russian oligarchs and and want to be oligarchs in Ukraine and what are we doing here we have to insist that these
forces sit down at the bargaining table and negotiate a settlement don't kill large numbers of Ukraine I mean everybody's willing to fight to the last Ukrainian is
little strange what are you doing.
You're supposed to be in favor of Peace you know and for the United States was just finished it invading and occupying Afghanistan and Iraq to be against another country invading mean who in the world is going to take this seriously this is crazy that
you know I invade it's good and you invade is terrible what you know what are you doing what why are you doing that what what's.
What's going on here all of these questions are being active by the way not just by socialist by lots of other people do inside the Democratic party and also inside the Republican Party.
You watch that Tucker Carlson or people like that they are against the stuff in in Ukraine they don't want,
the money spent there and want the weapon sent their they don't like the whole policy it's and Trump wobble so mr. Biden's policy has got all kinds of Critics on the left and the right and every day that this thing lasts,
these criticisms get bigger anyway the point is that AOC and Bernie.
Should be I think evaluated as the early shoots after a long winter of Cold War,
isolation from the hole,
you know what I explain to people the the contribution made for example to Modern Marxism I'll give you an example by the
the French philosopher Lewis l to say I don't know if the name means anything to you okay he was the Rector
of the ecole normale Superior in Paris that's equivalent,
imagine in this country if there were a university that combined Harvard Yale Princeton and MIT,
it would be the universe well they call normal in France in Paris is the he was a tenured professor who became the Rector the Rector is like the president of the University
an active member of the French Communist Party most of his adult life that was possible in France during the Cold War that was Unthinkable in this country who could not in a million years right so
Altus Air is a philosopher.
Tried to bring a version of post-modernism into Marxism with enormous
impact all over the world why he'd travel not just in Europe all over right so if you want to look him up I'll spell it out for you sure alth
u.s.s.
ER Louis the Louis's perello you is Louis althusser look at map you'll see tons of stuff by the way MIT press is a major publisher if I remember of his Works in English.
By the way the textbook I wrote in the economics in case you're ever interested was also published by the MIT press and the title.
Of the contending economic theories neoclassical Keynesian and Mark see of that's a no my marxian yeah that's right and by the way when we think,
I don't know if there's an interesting distinction between marxian economics and Marxist.
Is the supposed Marxism is the umbrella yeah of everything that I only use it because Marxist.
Use as a noun a person is a Marxist marxian used as an adjective to qualify but other I don't mean some great,
different there's a last point I would like to make about AOC and Bernie that's also General
I'm a historian to.
And I know that the transition out of feudalism in Europe that capitalism was a transition that took centuries
and that occurred in fits and starts so for example a funeral manner would start to disintegrate serfs would run away then run into a town
how would they live in the town they had no land anymore because they had run away from the feudal Manor.
A deal was struck without the people involved in the deal understanding what they were doing a merchant would say to one of these Serfs.
I'm in the business of buying and then reselling stuff and living off the difference but you know I could make more money if I produce some of this stuff
myself rather than buy it from somebody else so I'm going to I'm going to make you a deal I'm going to give you money
once a week I give you a money what we would later call a wage and you come here and under my supervision you make this crap that I'm going to then sell and this all works a in other words
there were there were efforts unconscious not self-aware to go out of feudalism to a new system.
Some of them lasted a few days and then fell apart.
Some of them lasted weeks or months or years but it took a long time before.
The conditions were ready for a kind of a General Switch and once that was done
it grew on itself and became the global capitalist system we have today that's the only model we have so for me
that's what I see when I look at socialism I see the Paris commune was an event an attempt.
Less than a few weeks I see Russia that was an attempt lasted 70 years
then I see a human fill in the blank I see these are all early experiments these are all you learns things to do learn things never to do again
The Good The Bad what do you build on how do you learn and that's what the Socialist and Marxist tradition when it's serious.
That's what it does so in the idea is sort of capitalism was a significant improvement over the feudalism yes and
we are coming to an age in over slavery and we're coming to an age where capitalism will die out and make it's not that
Capra's so how fundamentally broken
it's better than the things that came before but there is going to be things yet better and the day will be grounded in the ideas of Marxism and socialism is there just just a linger briefly at a
the way Marxism is used as a term on Twitter,
there's something called I'm sorry if I'm using the terms incorrectly but,
cultural Marxism right criticisms of the University's being infiltrated by cultural marxists I'm not exactly sure I don't.
Pay close enough no one is no no but it's woke it's there's a there's a kind of woke ideology that I'm not exactly sure.
What is not you that what is the fundamental that text that was the Karl Marx of woke - all I do know is that there are certain characteristics.
Of woke ideology which is.
Hard lines are drawn between the good guys and the bad guys and basically everyone is a bad guy except
except the people that are very loudly non-stop saying that they're the good guy and that applies across for internet for the racism
for sexism for gender or gender politics identity politics all that kind of stuff is there.
Is there any parallels between marxian economics and Marxist ideology and whatever is being called Marxism on Twitter.
No not much.
Mostly marks that you have to do one of the consequences of the taboo after World War 2 is that Marxism like socialism and communism become swear words it's like calling somebody.
Well I want to use bad language but using a four-letter word to describe somebody so instead of calling them this or that you call him a Marxist in many circles this.
Is even worse than whatever other adjective you might use but it doesn't have a particular meaning that I can assess the closest you get is your little list.
It is somebody who is concerned about.
Race and sex and sexual orientation gender and and all of those things and wants there to be trans.
Gendered bathrooms and I did that and I don't like any of these people so I slapped the word Marxism or the phrase cultural Marxism because it isn't Marxism about,
getting more money or controlling the industry or all those things that dimly we know Marxist somehow
are concerned about so this is odds and say don't know much about Muslim I've always been interested in culture I mean
lukacs the man I mentioned to you before gramsci that's what they're famous for the analysis of what Marxism particularly has to say about culture gramsci rights at Great length about the Catholic church about,
theater and painting and in Italy and on and I mean this is just ignorance talking they don't know anything about that it wouldn't know what their names are
it's a it's a label that summarizes kind of a shorthand I'm against all of these I don't want to be told
that is ugly racism in this country it always has been or sexism or,
phobia against gay people whatever it is that's agitating them random Marxism or socialism I mean it's just.
It's like socialism is the post office it is it is a mentality well but I don't blame them I mean it's childish.
It's mean-spirited.
But it comes out of the fact no one ever sat them down and said deal here is this tradition it's got these kinds of things that people kind of share and these big differences look.
An intelligent society which this country is could have and should have done that it was fear and a kind of Terror.
That made them behave in the way they did and we're now seeing it having said that there is such a thing as cultural Marxism what that is is simply those marxists.
Who devoted themselves to analyzing how it is that a particular culture
is on the one hand shaped by capitalism and on the other hand becomes a condition for capitalism to survive and grow in other words how do we analyze the interaction between.
The class struggle on the job and attitude towards sexuality or.
Movements in music or whatever else culture and there are.
Georg lukcs this Hungarian great name and are the greatest of all the names Antonio gramsci and a modern name just died a couple years ago a British
intellectual named Stuart Hall h all you want to if you want if I were teaching which I have done a course in cultural Marxism.
Those would be three major blocks on the syllabus I would give you articles and books to read,
of their stuff because it has been so seminal in provoking many many others so there is something to be said and understood about the kind of culture that capitalism creates and the kind of culture that enables
capitalism yes,
and Mark just are particularly those who like to look at that interaction in other words they're interested in how capitalism shapes culture and how culture shapes capitalism there's another name I forgot
Stuart Hall is British G she is Italian lukich is Hungarian.
The German is Walter Benjamin B enj am i n he was a member of the Frankfurt School which is a huge School
of Marxism that developed in Frankfurt Germany and that has a lot of people,
many of whom were interested in cultural questions it was a bit of a reaction against,
the narrow Marxism that was so focused on economics and politics there were people who said you're leaving out.
Very important parts of modern society that are shaping the economy as much as they are shaped by it and it was that impetus to open Marxism to be more inclusive
in what it deemed to be important to understand that this cult and they call themselves.
Cultural Marxist but they had a completely different meaning from this this is just you know just bad-mouthing that's all let me ask a more personal question social,
for most of the 20th century not most but a large many decades in the United States as a consequence of the Cold War and before being a Marxist is one of the worst things you could be.
Have you had dark periods in your own life where you've gone to some dark places in your mind where it was difficult.
Like self-doubt.
Difficult to know like what the hell am I doing when you're surrounded by colleagues and people you said prestigious universities both personal interest of career.
But also as a human being when everybody.
Yo kind of looks at you funny because you're studying this thing did that ever get you real low no.
I know people that who had the exactly what you said I mean your questions perfectly reasonable if I were you I'd be asking me that question do and what's wrong with you nothing wrong with the question yeah.
And here's the honest truth I don't know how anomalous I am I really don't but the truth is no I have.
If my wife was sitting here she tell you what she tells me which is I have been tremendously Lucky in my life which is true but then again luck never is the only explanation for things that's part of it.
Um
What can I say I didn't choose the time of my birth I didn't choose the communities in which I grew up other schools I attended or anything else no but the fact that there is no courses or extensive courses on marxian economics but you know again it's I'm Hegel.
On the one hand I was denied good instruction on the other hand I had to go out and learn it on my own and the motivation.
When you do that it's very different I'm not the student who sits there with my notebook taking notes of what the great professor says and reading the text and getting ready for the exam I don't have an exam
I had and I'm doing something slightly risk are you know kind of yeah romantically different and oppositional
I was able to find always
one or two professors that I could talk to outside of the classroom situation other students who felt enough similar to me
that we could get together and read these books and talk about them I had a number of really
fortuitous people who were kind to me and gave me of their time and their effort to teach me along the way.
Um and I've had the benefit that because I went to all these fancy schools.
I do know a lot of people who are in high places in this culture and when I have been put in difficult positions I often wave my pedigree.
And it works like garlic with the devil about the way they back away.
Because Americans are very deferential to us that kind of academic Prestige but there's a personal psychological thing that seems that you have never been shaken by this sea of the.
Just naturally somebody who just has perseverance.
Well I would put it I mean I understand what you're saying but I would put a little differently I think capitalism struck me early on in my life.
It's not that great assistant.
And nothing has happened to change my mind in other words the development
just.
Just kept giving me more and more evidence that this and I must say over the last 10 years what's really changed the last 10 years I mean,
I Can't Describe to you how big that change is and and that may be more important than anything else we've discussed.
Up until 10 years ago I would do a public event.
An interview on television or radio thing or give a talk at some conference or something.
Once every two or three months I'd be invited and I would do like academics often do.
I now do two to three to four interviews every day.
So there's a hunger they will how is there only it's that you know and I want to be honest with you.
As I say at the end of some of my talks allowed it to be kind of a pregnant pause from the podium you know that I leaned into the microphone and I say with as much Smile as I can get.
I'm having the time of my life and that's the truth yeah that's the truth I never expected look
I'm used to teaching a classroom a seminar for graduate students with eight or nine or 10 students or a or a regular undergraduate class with 30 or an occasional introductory course with a few hundred
I've done all of those things many times.
But an audience you know that I can count in the hundreds of thousands on YouTube and all of that know that that's new is there advice you can give given your.
Bold,
and non-standard career and life advice you can give to high school students college students about how to have a career like that or maybe how do I have a career or life that can be proud of.
Yeah
first of all my advice is go for it the conditions for doing that now.
Infinitely better than they were when I had to do it and I could do it.
And I can I'm happy I did it becoming a teacher is it one of those decisions I made that I've never regretted.
And I've never regretted being a Critic of this society never I find it edifying I find it.
I mean the Gratitude people expressed to me for helping them see kind of what's going on.
Is unbelievably encouraging or what what can I tell you so that kills you that feels you enjoy pointing out that the emperor has no clothes feels you,
it's that's that's a life and not just important as the joy because you're most of the people.
Who say something like that to me are people who if they had the vocabulary and some of them do would say you know.
I thought I was seeing through that outfit that ever was wearing yeah I thought it
and they did and all they needed was a little extra this information or that factoid or this logic I and they have that and I remember having that too,
when I had a teacher who made something clear that had been murky I always felt gratitude.
And now I get that gratitude a good bit and a yes it is enormously.
Gratifying and I'm not sure I could could get it any other way and it.
I had learned and I'm walking proof that being a Critic of society.
And doing it systematically and sharing it with other people.
Makes for a very good life very good life.
Speaking of which however one other aspect of human nature is that life comes to an end.
Mmm do you think about your death are you afraid of it afraid of it no think about it yes yes.
I'm not afraid.
I've always thought you know death is hard for the people that are left when you're dead you know very much so it's.
I worry more about my wife I'm very attached to my wife I am I mentioned to you I got married when I was 23 years old and that's my wife did his day.
So I'm lucky because that's if you get married to anybody and at age 23 the either locked or it isn't what is what role has this love played in your life enormous.
Because I came from a family you know if your family is political refugees which mine were who had to interrupt their lives
moved to another continent learn another language find another life income and job and as the disruption
those real deep for any Refugee so so my mother and father were both refugees.
They met as refugees
so I had to in a way.
Make it up to them I had to be I was the first child of there I was younger sister but who the first child and.
You know there's a lot of psychological pressure on you if you're in that situation nobody means you arm but you've got to do.
What they couldn't what was shut off to them in a way they want you to do it's the closest they're going to get.
To what they had hoped and my parents were both University students my father was a lawyer my mother had to leave the university to run for her life.
So I had to perform one thing I School here in the United States I.
I had to get all A's I had to be on the football team I had to play the violin the orchestra had do all these because everything had to be achieved.
So I'm going to achievement,
crazy person that way and but that's functional in this dysfunctional Society but on top of that Destiny achievement.
Within the game of this particular society then loves seems to be a thing that's greater than that game is that something that made you a better person all God how is it,
how's the weather better marxian and a better everything because my wife my wife by profession.
Is a psychotherapist excellent I love it and I needed it yeah.
And So I Married it I didn't know what I was doing at the time but I think as I look back on it that was more,
more than a little what was going on.
And she has tutored me all my life about a whole range of aspects of life that my family never.
Talked about never dealt with never.
At least explicitly engaged in any of that because it was all about survival The Immigrant challenges survives survives about and you're so busy.
That you tell yourself you can't do that,
of course you can and there are other reasons why you're not going to look at those problems but the survival is so urgent that you can fool yourself this way and my parents did that one last question.
What's the meaning of life ritual.
Why will he won't you mr. marks let's go life is struggle and not for me.
I have found
that to be true that the struggle.
Whether it is to build a relationship with your child I have two children whether it's to build one with your spouse
whether it's to understand the complicated argument and simplify it so that you can.
Share the pleasure of understanding this the relationship to a student or to an audience these are the it's a struggle to do all those things but that.
That network of struggles that makes life
interesting intriguing and satisfied.
A meaningful very meaning and that ladder thing I got to say you do masterfully you're one of the great communicators and Educators good out there today and it's a huge honor that he was still with me for so many hours thank you this is awesome.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Richard Wolff to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you with some words from Karl Marx.
The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways the point however is to change it.
Thank you for listening.
Music.